HEY AARON
===
At Startup Institute we believe that students should be doing something

Other than listening at least 80% of the time.
**Real World Learning** – Startup Institute instructors bring with them real world experience from their professional roles. Examples include a github repos, Q2 marketing & sales data, or recent product designs. These situations give students the context to think about and explore what they are learning. By bringing their work with them, instructors spark a dialogue around relevant best practices & potential hurdles students will face.

**Artifacts of Learning** – Having students create original work is critical to student learning at Startup Institute. Whether it is writing code, designing a new product, or writing a marketing strategy proposal based on recent sales data, activities provide a meaningful way for students to practice the skills they have learned from the instructor. Student work is also a great way for instructors to assess student understanding and give meaningful feedback.

**Deeper Thought Through Action** – By pushing students to answer questions, analyze situations, discuss events, and collaborate to find better solutions the amount of cognitive work increases, which leads to deeper student understanding.

**You, Your Experiences and Your Opinion Are More Important Than Your PowerPoint** – A PowerPoint is not a necessity at Startup Institute, although it can supplement you by giving you a way to efficiently give students detailed information and organize yourself.

**Constant Collaboration** – The union of two brains to accomplish one task leads to a transfer of abilities for both individuals. Allowing time for this collaboration enhances the learning experience.

**Reflection **- Reflection forces your brain to try to make sense of the block of learning that has just occurred. Further, reflecting on personal progress, challenges, and next steps deepens the learning experience because emotions are forced to be brought into the mix.

**What is an Intensive?**

Intensives are directly facilitated by an instructor and should be individualized to that instructor’s experiences, using the Startup Institute Core Instructional Practices. Intensives are primarily instructor led.

**Step 1:  Setting the Vision**

Objective: By the end of this session, students will be able to…

* Understand dealing with type via CSS, best practices for type (leading, measure, hierarchy, etc.), & limitations

**Key Points**

What 3-5 pieces of knowledge and/or skills are embedded in this objective? What is the essential information that students must know in order to master the objective? 

1. Leading (line-height) vs. measure (line length) vs. font-size

2. The relationship of all type elements to each other

3. Better understanding of the cascade

4. Limitations of platforms

**Assessment**

Describe, briefly, what students will do to show you that they have mastered (or made progress toward) the objective. This is a way to ensure your objectives are measurable. Actions, deliverables, etc.

* Show an @font-face declaration using best practices

* Provide a simple "spec sheet" that demonstrates basic styles & the cascade

    * This shows CSS that makes good use of the cascade

    * I.e., not overly specific, builds on base styles, etc.

**Investment**

What experiences do I have that can bring content to life?

What can I bring with me to show the importance of the topic?

What projects am I involved with at work that I can bring with me to Startup Institute?

How can I turn what I am working on into a "live" case study?

* 8 years as a self-taught web dev (agency style & product-focused)

* ? (input requested)

**Step 2:  Determining Instructional Methods**

Pre-Reading or Pre-Class Assignment

Do I want students to do something prior to class to be prepared for my content?  Are there any blogs that I want to share with students? Do I want them to prepare for a case study?

* Go through all the cards of [Typecards](http://typecardsapp.com/), in order to learn some basic type vocab

* [Jon Tan's blog](http://jontangerine.com)

    * [The Paragraph in Web Typography & Design](http://v1.jontangerine.com/log/2008/06/the-paragraph-in-web-typography-and-design)

    * [The Incredible Em & Elastic Layouts with CSS](http://v1.jontangerine.com/log/2007/09/the-incredible-em-and-elastic-layouts-with-css)

* Glance through [Smashing Magazine’s Beautiful Typography post](http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2013/08/06/beautiful-typography-web-design/)

Lecture/Talk Opening (5 - 10 mins): How am I going to introduce myself?

* Vital stats (name, gig, experience)

* Show one or two beautiful type experiences & discuss my enjoyment

**Introduction to Concept**

How do I introduce what I am talking about for the day so that students begin to actively take in and internalize the key points?

* Show one or two beautiful type experiences & discuss my enjoyment

* Point out why I feel these are great examples of good type

**The Experience/Discussion**

This should be the core of the experience, helping them understand and apply the key points. What can I bring with me to ensure this is meaningful? What is the Case Study? What can students be asked to do?

Consider: What will students do as I explain information and demonstrate skills?  Take notes, listen, work along with you, etc.?

* Discussion

    * Why is type beautiful?

    * Why is it useful?

    * What makes it useful, yet more than just functional?

* Experiment w/ what happens when type is changed via CSS

    * Font-size

    * Line-height

    * Line length (via changing the container size)

    * Font-style

    * Font-weight

        * Briefly discuss issues w/ font-weight support

* Discuss what CSS3 introduces, & why it matters so much

    * @font-face

        * Have students work along & code an @font-face declaration

        * Demonstrate best practices & the [Font Squirrel generator](http://www.fontsquirrel.com/tools/webfont-generator)

        * Brief review of legal issues

    * text-shadow

    * word-break, hyphenation, & overflow-wrap

    * [caniuse.com](http://caniuse.com)

* Fun details

    * Diacritics

    * Proper punctuation (quotation marks vs. apostrophes, etc.)

        * [Smart Quotes for Smart People](http://smartquotesforsmartpeople.com/)

**Wrap Up**

Repeat, Review, and Reflect with the students. Return to the initial goals of the intensive and recap what was covered during the session. How can I end the intensive with actionable takeaways, ie. resources, opportunities for deeper exploration etc.

* Check out [H5BP](http://html5boilerplate.com/) & [normalize.css](http://necolas.github.io/normalize.css/), examine how they can help

* Refactor the CSS for the coffee shop/blog site to be simpler & more of a system

**Post Session/Deliverables:**

What extension activities or next steps can I leave students with? If they continue working on a Community Engagement plan (MKT track) or various prototypes (product track) can they send it to me next week for feedback? Do I have other resources I can direct them to as a next step?

* Definitely can send WIP for review by me

* Tons of resources:

    * [A List Apart — Topic: Typography & Web Fonts](http://alistapart.com/topic/typography-web-fonts)

    * [The Elements of Typographic Style Applied to the Web](http://webtypography.net/)

    * [Smashing Magazine — Posts Tagged "Typography"](http://www.smashingmagazine.com/tag/typography/)

**Timing**

Consider going back through this document and attaching timing to each item. Make sure to build time in at the end of the session for informal check-ins with students.

